    PART F | The Culture, Practices and Ethics of the Press: the Press and the Public

                • The MoS repeated a figure that had already been corrected twice while there was
                    a PCC complaint about the figure with the paper.
                • Despite two successful PCC complaints about a specific statistic and published
                    corrections in both the Mail and the Mail on Sunday, the Mail group are still
                    repeating the figure.
                • Either the Mail group’s internal processes for noting complaints are inadequate, or
                    they do not take PCC negotiated corrections seriously.”

    12.15 To those bullet points might be added a fifth point, namely that complaints to the PCC would
          never have been required had the titles replied to the original letters sent by Carbon Brief
          direct to the newspapers. Accordingly, the example raises concerns about the ability, or
          willingness, of some newspaper titles to respond to complaints made direct to the newspaper
          by readers. Sensibly, most complaints should be resolved at that level without the need to
          refer a complaint to the regulatory body. But the Carbon Brief example suggests that, in some
          cases, some newspapers ignore complaints entirely, or delay in responding for significant
          periods, until the regulator, or the courts, are involved.

    12.16 The three examples above provide evidence of each of the three specific concerns raised by
          witnesses in relation to inadequate complaint handling by parts of the press: i) the delay and
          expense of bringing a complaint, ii) the reluctance of parts of the press to apologise or correct
          errors, and iii) the failure to give due prominence to apologies and corrections.


F           Unnecessary delay and over-complication of the complaints process
    12.17 Full Fact provided the Inquiry with evidence of all three issues. In relation to the delay
          occasioned by parts of the press when dealing with complaints, Full Fact suggested that
          some newspapers deliberately complicate and draw out the complaints process as a tactic
          to avoid making apologies and corrections. They wrote that “little effort is made on the part
          of newspapers to avoid making the process extremely awkward and time consuming for
          complainants”.609 610 Will Moy spoke of their regular experience as follows:611

                  “Where the first offer you get is, “We’ll amend the headline online only”. Then you
                  get the offer of “We’ll print a letter from Full Fact disagreeing with our article but we
                  won’t change the article or admit there was anything wrong with it”. Then you get
                  page 12, then you get page 6, then you get page 4, then you get page 2. All of this,
                  rounds and rounds of correspondence, weeks between them, takes forever, deeply
                  tiring. And all of this, of course, after the actual inaccuracy has been accepted.”

    12.18 A specific example of apparently deliberate awkwardness was Full Fact’s evidence that on
          three occasions, after a long process of negotiating agreed corrections, and after having
          reached agreement, the Daily Mail had contacted the PCC to seek changes to the agreement
          on the night before publication. The organisation noted:612



    609
        p9, ibid
    610
        Mr Moy overstates the position in suggesting that this is standard practice within newspapers. The Inquiry has
    received much evidence to contrary effect: see, for example, the decision of the Court of Appeal in KC v MGN Ltd
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1382 and the earlier decision of Eady J in Bowman v NGN [2010] EWHC 858 (QB)
    611
        p63, lines 5-18, William Moy, http://www.levesoninquiry.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Transcript-of-
    Morning-Hearing-8-February-2012.pdf
    612
        p9, http://www.levesoninquiry.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Second-Submission-by-Full-Fact.pdf


                                                              712
