                                      Chapter 6 | Criticisms of the Culture, Practices and Ethics of the Press

             and which would not pass the pre-watershed test for television, should not be
             displayed in newspapers which are sold at child’s eye level with no age-restriction.
             These recommendations would allow for consistency in media regulation when it
             comes to keeping harmful materials out of the mainstream and away from children.”

8.12   It is hard to argue against that in respect of some of the material contained in the Sport at
       least, but the regulation of the sale of explicit print material does not fall directly within the
       scope of this Inquiry. Of greater potential concern to the Inquiry is the degree to which the
       images may reflect a wider cultural failure to treat women with dignity and respect and/or a
       practice which, intentionally or not, has the effect of demeaning and degrading women.

8.13   In respect of Page 3 imagery, there are a range of arguments. There are those, like Object
       and the recently formed internet group “No More Page 3”, who argue that the persistent
       representation of topless young women on the pages of national newspapers is inherently
       degrading and demeaning. By contrast, there are those like Mr Mohan, who argue that Page
       3 is “neither harmful nor offensive”, and satisfies the demands of a readership.365 Somewhere
       in between are those who argue that Page 3 is simply an anomaly: out of place in the 21st
       century where a woman is just as likely as a man to purchase (or edit) a tabloid newspaper,
       or lead the country.

8.14   The arguments between those who adopt each viewpoint will continue. But for the purposes
       of this Inquiry, the interesting point is that it was not Page 3 per se which gave rise to the
       core complaints made by women’s groups. Instead, it was a general attitude which was
       found throughout the pages of those tabloids which contained images of semi-naked women
       (referred to as ‘Page 3 tabloids’), and of which Page 3 was only one example. Object, along                F
       with other organisations such as Turn Your Back on Page 3, Eaves Housing for Women, and
       the End Violence Against Women Coalition argued that Page 3 imagery was part of a broader
       culture of objectification and sexualisation of women in those newspapers. Ms Van Heeswijk
       wrote:

             “This pervasive objectification and sexualisation of women is not restricted to the
             portrayal of the Page 3 models or to the Page 3 type feature. Rather, to varying
             extents, it influences the way that almost all women are portrayed in Page 3 tabloids,
             including female celebrities. Examples include an article in the Daily Star on the size
             of “15 year old” Charlotte Church’s breasts (“She’s a big girl now… Child singing
             sensation showed just how quickly she’s grown up after turning up at a Hollywood
             bash looking chest swell”). This is juxtaposed with commentary of outrage against
             the satirical “sting” Brass Eye documentary’s “Paedophile special” (Exhibit 4). More
             recent examples include a feature in the Sport commenting on the genitalia of a
             female newsreader which it describes in derogatory terms. (Exhibit 5)”366

8.15   Both of the examples given in that passage support the broader points made by Ms Van
       Heeswijk and others. First, the unfortunate juxtaposition of the article expressing outrage at
       a satirical programme on paedophilia and an article commenting on a 15 year-old’s breasts
       exposes a hypocrisy in relation to the sexualisation of young girls and women that is seen
       beyond the Page 3 tabloids: some have commented on the awkward co-existence of the Daily
       Mail’s support for “traditional values” with the Mail Online’s “sidebar of shame”. Second, the
       article commenting on the genitalia of a female newsreader supports the view that some
365
    pp1-2, paras 2-11, http://www.levesoninquiry.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Second-Witness-Statement-of-
Dominic-Mohan1.pdf
366
    p1, para 10, http://www.levesoninquiry.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/Witness-statement-of-Anna-van-
Heeswijk.pdf


                                                     663
