
tributing factor in a mission-threatening incident on Flight 61-C,
the mission immediately prior to the January 28 Challenger
launch.

3. There are numerous documented cases where contractor em-
ployees failed to comply with guidelines for carrying out assigned
duties, including specific “Operations and Maintenance Instruc-
tions” (OMIs). Such failures contributed to both of the major mis-
haps in 1985 involving Shuttle processing—namely, the November
8, 1985, “handling ring” episode which led to significant damage to
a Solid Rocket Motor segment slated for use on STS 51-L, and the
March 8, 1985, “payload bay access platform” episode which led to
significant damage to bay payload bay door. Failure to follow an
OMI also led to improper (and mission-threatening) handling of the
hydrogen disconnect valve during the 51-L launch operations. All
of these incidents show a lack of discipline, both with respect to fol-
lowing prescribed procedures and with respect to reporting viola-

tions of these procedures.
4. At the time of the Challenger accident, the lack of spare parts

caused a degree of cannibalization (i.e., the removal of a part from
one Orbiter to satisfy a need for a spare part on another Orbiter),
which was the highest in the history of the Shuttle program and
which was a threat to flight schedule and flight safety. Excessive
cannibalization leads to multiple installations, retesting, added doc-
umentation, delayed access to parts, and increased damage poten-
tial. As a result, cannibalization contributes directly to excessive
overtime.

5. There is no clear evidence whether or not greater involvement
of the development contractors would improve Shuttle operations.

Recommendations

1. Because of the serious quality and safety concerns surround-
ing the contract, NASA should conduct a careful review of Shuttle
processing, the SPC contract, and the relationship of flight hard-
ware contractors and report its findings, recommendations, and
proposed contract modifications to the Committee. NASA’s reexam-
ination should include a comparison of efficiency and safety under
the SPC versus efficiency and safety during pre-1983 Shuttle proc-
essing operations, which heavily involved the development contrac-
tors.

2. NASA should examine the issues of spares availability and
cannibalization and provide the Congress with a management and

budgetary plan for correcting previous logistical problems.
3. NASA should stop routine cannibalization and develop guilde-

lines (including appropriate control and review procedures and
roles for the SR&QA office) governing permissible cannibalization.

4. The Committee recommends that NASA provide its re-invig-
orated safety office with the authority to enforce scheduling that

leads to safe overtime rates.
b. Pressures on Shuttle Operations

Issue

Was NASA under pressure to fly more flights? How did this
pressure originate? Will it recur?
